## Tree Canopy
Percentage of land area covered by tree canopy. 

### Why is this important?
Tree canopy is the layer of branches and leaves that cover the ground when viewed from above. Tree canopy provides many benefits to communities: improving water quality, saving energy and reducing cooling costs, lowering summer temperatures, reducing air pollution, enhancing property values, providing wildlife habitat, facilitation of social and educational opportunities, and providing aesthetic benefits. Strategies for increasing tree canopy include neighborhood tree planting initiatives, street tree plantings, and the Street Tree Replacement Program, plantings in medians and parking lots, and plantings along riparian buffers (vegetated areas near creeks and streams). Trees produce oxygen, indirectly reduce pollution by lowering air temperature and improve public health by reducing air pollutants that can cause death and illness. The existing tree canopy in the city of Charlotte removes approximately 6,990,000 pounds of air pollution annually, valued at over $16 million.

#### How are we doing?
The findings reveal that within the official boundaries of the City of Charlotte, 94,161 acres were covered with urban tree canopy. This constitutes 47% of the city’s total land expanse of 199,022 acres. Furthermore, there are 36,795 acres covered with other vegetation where it would be possible to plant trees, making up 18.5% of the city. Consequently, Charlotte's urban tree canopy potential, combining the existing canopy with the viable planting areas, is 66%. The remaining 68,066 acres, 34% of the city, were deemed unsuitable for tree planting.

The entire area of Mecklenburg County (335,267 land acres) was comprised of 52% urban tree canopy, about 5% higher than the City alone. There are 66,149 acres available for tree planting opportunities over the entire area, again coming in slightly more than that of the City. These more favorable results for the county as a whole are expected due to a lower relative amount of urbanized area in the County as a whole, but represent prime opportunities to preserve and protect canopy as the city expands. Conversely, about 29% (95,584 land acres) of the county was found to be unsuitable for planting trees.

Over the 4-year study period, there was an slight decrease in Charlotte's urban tree canopy. Tree canopy decreased by 969 acres citywide, this equates to a 1% decrease since 2018. To compare, Mecklenburg County as a whole gained 273 canopy acres over the study period, equating to a small 0.2% increase in canopy cover.

#### Related Variables
<a href="javascript:void(0)" onclick="model.metricId = 'm4'">Impervious Surface</a>  
<a href="javascript:void(0)" onclick="model.metricId = 'm49'">Tree Canopy - Residential</a>  

### About the Data
Number of acres of land covered by tree canopy divided by total land area. All land use categories are included in the percentage. This assessment utilized high-resolution (60-centimeter) multispectral imagery from the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s National Agriculture Imagery Program (NAIP) collected in 2022. Modern machine learning techniques were used to create a six-class land cover dataset. This new technology provides a more precise and accurate accounting of tree canopy than that used in previous studies; therefore, percentage of tree canopy in 2022 is not comparable to the percentage of tree canopy calculated in the 2002, 2008, and 2013 urban ecosystem assessments.

_**Source**: PlanIT Geo: (https://planitgeo.com/)_


### Additional Resources
| Learn More |  | 
| :- | :- |
|[Charlotte Tree Ordinance](https://www.charlottenc.gov/Growth-and-Development/Getting-Started-on-Your-Project/Urban-Forestry/Charlotte-Tree-Manual-Legacy-Guidelines)| Ordinances and best practices for planning trees in the City.
|[Project Funding Opportunity](https://www.charlottenc.gov/Streets-and-Neighborhoods/Get-Involved/Neighborhood-Matching-Grants)| See how the City's Neighborhood Matching Grant program can fund improvements.
|[Urban Tree Canopy Assessment](https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/17016df33e0a4450a1543c61d594585a)| This collaborative Tree Canopy Assessment by the City of Charlotte and TreesCharlotte, a local non-profit, aims to update past analyses performed, and to better understand the distribution of tree cover throughout the City. In addition, land cover outside of the City's current boundaries were also included and assessed to provide context for future planning efforts.
|[Urban Tree Canopy Care Program](https://www.charlottenc.gov/City-Government/Departments/General-Services/Tree-Management/Canopy-Care)| The City of Charlotte is offering certified arborist services to qualifying residents in multiple Climate & Economic Justice Screening Tool (CJEST) census blocks who have concerns about large trees on their property. Tree pruning and removal costs for trees can exceed thousands of dollars. To help mitigate the inequities in tree canopy, the Canopy Care Program provides care for trees on private property. Eligible tree care includes tree assessment, planting new trees, pruning trees and removing hazardous trees to enhance the overall canopy health on private property within Charlotte’s designated communities.
 
| Take Action |  | 
| :- | :- |
|[Trees Charlotte](http://www.treescharlotte.org)| Working to address the City's tree loss from development, protect its forests and native species, and create new green space.
|[Annual Tree Sapling Sale](https://www.ncagr.gov/news/press-releases/2024/06/24/nc-forest-service-tree-seedlings-go-sale-july-1)| Purchase tree seedlings from the NC Forest Services.
|[Keep Charlotte Beautiful](https://www.charlottenc.gov/Streets-and-Neighborhoods/Get-Involved/Keep-Charlotte-Beautiful)| Working together to create a cleaner, greener and more sustainable Charlotte.